today I'm going to train my cousin who's
here from the UK he's a golf pro and
he's coming off a knee reconstruction uh
how long ago was it a year ago year ago
now here's the thing this is going to
relate to anyone who's come back from
knee injury or people that just haven't
trained for a long period of time I'm
going to be following the exact same
principles with Gaz if I wasn't here Gaz
and you wanted to train legs what do you
think you would do warm up for 10 15
minutes then I would jump on to high B S
three sets of five then do um at a
control Tempo then go on to high bar
squats again maybe three sets of more
reps and then go into some accessories
rdls or car raises or something like
that same kind of patent around that you
know that's very logical sequence I
think great choice of exercises however
if you've taken one year off and you
come in and you do that much volume on
your quads you're not going to be
walking right for at least a week which
is very counterintuitive for what I want
him to be doing which is getting back
into a good routine of training 3 days 4
days even 5 days a week if he's too sore
tomorrow he doesn't want to come to the
gym again so my objective is actually to
have him walking out of the session
feeling like he could have done more so
pain isn't an indication of a successful
session so let's have a look at what
we're going to be doing for G first
things first I'm going to start you with
the warmup with my favorite warmup which
is is not even a body weight squat so a
lot of the times uh people just do body
weight squats as a warm-up this is going
to take weight off your body weight so
it's going to be even easier and I want
20 reps so come over here grab this
increase the tension by stepping back
back back the further back you go the
easier it becomes okay all right now
what I want you to do is squat 20 reps
ask the
grass
perfect nice and deep nice and deep
good hey come over here check this out
so here's a few things that I'm looking
at when it comes to his squat so
normally I wouldn't tell him this this
is just my observation have a look at
his lower back um you can see rounding
of his lumbar spine here so that tells
me something that I probably knew based
on his background as a British dude
Celtic hips have typically deep hip
sockets not all of them but a lot of
them just like Chinese hips so if you
look at the weightlifting uh the best
weightlifters in the world Chinese have
really beautiful Aster grass squats
really nice proportions short FEMA as
well as shallow hip sockets to allow for
greater Mobility he has deep hip sockets
like Celtic hips and therefore his range
of motion is limited so you see a little
bit of buttwink is that
dangerous well he's had to live with it
his whole life but what I'm going to do
is just think about that for his squats
and know that he has very limited range
of motion so and ask the grass squat for
him can be achieved if we use certain
tools such as heal elevation but I'm not
going to say any of that to him I'm
going to assume and he's going to
pretend that he can't hear me right now
and he's going to show me his squats um
based on whatever he knows 2 minutes
rest the next warm-up set is going to be
a goblet squat something that I like
about a goblet squat similar to what we
had here uh with the band um that
reduces the weight of your body weight
so it makes it a lot easier but it also
holds you more upright so a lot of
people that lack squat Mobility if they
haven't done it for a long period time
might try and do a deep Squat and lack
range of motion and might be off balance
whereas holding on to something like
that allows greater depth and a lot
better balance same with a goblet squat
or even a counterbalance squat which is
what I'm going to get Gareth to do
that's going to allow him to achieve
great depth for a warmup and great
balance as well so you're going to hold
this in front of you and you're going to
give me five reps okay standing your
comfortable squat stands pretty good
squat stands arms straight out nice and
deep
really nice so this is a counterbalance
squat let's look at his low back right
here there's very minimal rounding
that's putting him in a nice position to
be able to do
that
beautiful okay stay there some people
think um you know just body weight got
without weight is easier because now
this is loaded with 10 kg let's have a
look at what you look like without a
weight yeah I'd even put your hands out
in front just as a counterbalance anyway
but let's have a look at his body
position little bit more lumbar rounding
because he doesn't have the weight that
he needs to brace for okay so that's why
I prefer to use a
counterbalance as the first progression
from body weight okay chill before we go
to an empty barbell so that was a 10 kg
counterbalance I'm going to give him the
next progression which is 15 kg now
that's a very light weight for a strong
guy uh you know Gareth is what's your
body weight about 90 kg
gets up to 90 it's about 82 83 now okay
so an 80 he's still an active guy like
he's a golf pro uh so I don't want to
say just because he stopped squatting
for a year that he doesn't have leg
strength he absolutely does um but as we
know because he hasn't squatted uh for a
year I'm going to be very very gentle
with the warm-ups so the next
progression he just did 10 kg we're
going to go up to 15 kg before we get to
the 20 KG Bar as much as I'd love a
counterbalance squat 15 kg gets pretty
tiring for your
so this time I'm going to get you to
hold it on your chest so that was a
counterbalance Squad this is called a
goblet Squad okay watch that Mike yeah
good hold it on your chest good five
reps full
depth
good it's pretty hard to see come side
on it's pretty hard to see but there's
still like it's really great depth but
there's still a little bit of Lumbar
rounding good and sure next we go to an
empty Bar B and Gareth was the one that
suggested that he's going to do a high
bar squat um an approach that I have
with everyone that I work with is I
don't care what squat we start with
whether it's a high bar a low bar or a
front squat I'm going to ask him to show
me how he's going to squat with the
barbell on his back in whatever his most
comfortable position is if I think it's
the right one we keep going if I think I
can make any changes that's what I'm
going to do let's
see give me five
reps good really good
very good um once again he followed all
of the right technical cues um except he
still got that same level of Mobility so
for all of the squat patterns that we
gave him there's a small amount of
Lumbar rounding there's a lot of
discussion on whether or not butwink is
bad now I'm going to leave that to The
Experts when it comes to physiotherapy
so loading the spine in that Flex
position um there's Arguments for and
against that but from a strength
standpoint it's a loss of tension and I
don't want that so I'm going to going to
do all that I can to avoid that and my
number one intervention for this is to
Simply add a heel elevation let's see if
I've got a weightlifting shoe that fits
his foot what size are you uh
10 sure I do I've never squatt in
these ever so this is a squat shoe very
flat and hard surface but this has a
slight heel elevation of roughly 1 in
and it tapers downwards to no elevation
at the toe so G just asked me why I
would use these shoes and uh I use them
for some of my squat patterns and I'll
use a flat sold shoe for another
depending on what I'm trying to achieve
I don't just do a squat because squats a
good exercise and that's what we should
do I'm either going to squat because I
want to shift the heaviest loads
possible like I do in a powerlifting
competition or I want to build a certain
group of muscles so typically people
squat because they want to build their
quadriceps so how do we maximize
quadriceps development we put ourselves
in a position where we can achieve
maximal knee Bend so you've got a hip
dominant squat such as in a powerlifting
competition you don't have a huge amount
of knee Bend it's a very hip dominant
squat so it's not great for quadriceps
development so for quads development we
put ourselves in a position where we can
maximize our knee Bend and that Footwear
is the best footw to be able to do that
so do I do I push into the heel of this
no no it's going to make me want to go
forward in okay it will okay so so yeah
you want to be midfoot you want to be as
upright as possible you want to keep
doing the same things okay let's go give
me five
reps good stance just outside of hip
width toes pointed very slightly
outwards that's good looking straight
ahead big breath to
brace
good really nice looks a little bit
deeper
which is what is going to happen with
the elevated heel but there's one small
change I'm going to make and that's with
his bracing he's arching his tail a
little bit too much come
in so if you have a look at what he's
doing he's got this nice upper back
brace which is what I like so elbows
back but I want him to go down as well
so he's just really back so I want him
down and that's causing a big arch in
his upper back and an arch in his lower
back so what I want is elbows back and
down and then I want you to think of
bracing AB so there's two things I like
through brace stbs like you're about to
get punched in the guts and you want to
contract those rectus abdominis see what
happened was his rib cage went downwards
to do that so Arch back when you're
doing before so his his rib cage is
elevating and and that's lengthening
those rectus abdominis muscles if I
punch him there he's going straight to
the floor right you don't want that so
you want to contract those muscles whack
by bringing the ribs down and
Contracting the rectus abdominal so
there's two parts of that ribs down and
pelvis up okay so what he's doing he's
is arching his tail the cue that I give
is piss up a wall so so think of that
all right so so put your hands here
elbows back and down good now see your
arch so contract the ABS like I'm going
to punch you pop so piss up wall and
Brace those abs
good nice so now you're starting with a
more neutral position and it's a
stronger brace let's do that again okay
okay so we're going to do five reps
again
so elbows back and down okay
good from here brace those abs like I'm
about to punch you and piss up a wall
looking straight ahead take a big breath
hold that brace control control control
and up good big breath brace ribs down
good keep those ribs down knees out and
drive two good I want five big breath
piss up a wall open those hips now we're
getting a much nicer range of motion and
minimizing that butt
link beautiful and up excellent good and
rack nice good
student Yes
actually now I'm anticipating we're not
going to go super heavy now I know he's
strong enough to go a lot heavier um I'd
say I'm just going to go a little bit
heavier so maybe 60 kg and instead of
doing his original plan three sets of
five high bar squats again maybe three
sets of more reps and then go into some
accessories rdl's or that's six sets of
squats and I promise you if he did that
tomorrow and the next day he won't be
able to sit on a toilet properly so I
don't want that that's not a good
indicator of a successful session I want
you walking out of here feeling like you
could have done a little bit more
because then guess what you get to do
next week do again you get to do more
next week do you get it and the way that
I'd progress him next week is I'd load
and I'd add another set or two and
you'll be able to do it without having
all of the leg sess all right so let's
go up slightly so I don't need you to do
five reps again so this is just to feel
the weight the next one's going to be
the top set all right so give me two
reps that's
good so all the finer details he's doing
it right I like to say grab the bar
symmetrically as close as your shoulder
Mobility lows that might look quite far
apart but you might not have great
shoulder Mobility but it looks pretty
good to me
he's standing in a very comfortable
stance so think about opening those hips
and pushing those knees slightly
outwards to allow room for your pelvis
to sit in that bottom position brace
your core ribs down control nice and
deep and drive
beautiful don't exhale till you finish
this the movement so hold your breath
the whole
way keep holding your breath till you
get to the top now exhale good bring it
in
awesome good how's it feeling good are
you happy if iing try bring my hands in
more yeah yeah I wouldn't mind so so the
way that I'm looking at it is you you
bring your hands as close as your
shoulders can go to to to squeeze your
elbows together and your shoulder blades
together which is upper back tension and
that's what you're doing so you can do
that with wide grip uh but if you bring
it in a little bit closer it'll increase
that tension and make the movement
stronger cuz I'm not as big as I was I
reckon I can get a bit narrow yeah I'd
say so too so currently you're going
about pinking on that line um why don't
you do this measure your thumb to this
line and see if you can get there okay
let's have it go so this is your first
work set the goal is five reps two sets
Okay let's
go yeah good elbows no no that's too
high on your back okay it's kind of like
there there it's got to be on the meat
of the upper traps good elbows back and
down good nice yeah real good yeah real
good okay now from here good give me
that brace piss up a wall control knees
out knees out and drive one wait big
breath brace control he's out and drive
two good wait big breath control he's
out drive three good weit big breath
control knees
out speed good weight last one big
breath control knees out and drive
excellent
good
that's hard
now if I'm being honest he's working
harder than I wanted him to work
today okay so actually I'm not even
going to make him do another set that's
it for squats and then next week we can
increase the volume uh and right now
we're going to go onto the next exercise
if you had a look at the bar speed it
slowed down a fair bit on the last
couple of reps so I know Gareth is a
strong guy because last time he was
visiting he was squatting a lot more
than that what's your best squat 120
right so so this is half of what he can
do but as you saw it was quite hard now
if he does multiple sets of that um he's
going to get too much leg sess I promise
you you're going to have leg sess
tomorrow just from that it wasn't even
much um and it's less than what he's
able to do as well but it's just how it
goes if you've taken significant time
off training and come back for a hard
leg session it's it's going to be too
painful the next day I'd rather you walk
out of here with no pain and come back
again tomorrow for a good session okay
next up uh we're going to do some
deadlifts yes shoes off for the deadlift
I don't need the heels elevated for this
exercise and my preferred Footwear is no
Footwear now if you remember his choice
of
exercises uh was after he did you know
three sets of five high bar Squat and
then three sets of eight um was going to
be a Romanian deadlift so we saw we
reduced the amount of volume
significantly for his highb squats and
instead of doing a Romanian deadlift
Romanian deadlift is an excellent choice
of exercises uh it's actually a lot
better for hamstrings and and building
muscle than a conventional deadlift but
right now I don't really care for muscle
gain he's not going to build any muscle
in today's session I want to reintroduce
movement patterns that are going to
stick with him so that it can carry over
to Romanian defts down the line and my
favorite way to do that is a straight up
conventional deadlift now from a
coaching standpoint I'm not going to
give him a shopping list of cues I'm
going to see how he does it he could be
doing it perfectly to begin with and if
I give him a whole bunch of cues it
could confuse him so if he's doing it
right I'm not going to change a thing
but if there's anything wrong with what
he's doing that's when I come in with
any of my queuing let's have a go do you
want
overhand split with that weight it
doesn't really matter so you can go
overhand double overhand is good show me
how your
deadlift you look like you follow
Australian strength coach I do mate yeah
religiously yeah he's already got the uh
the q's down
pat five reps good
really
good learn from the
best okay so I'll tell you now as much
as I'd love to say that's really good
like there's always something that we
can uh change so the first things that I
look at is his stance looked like it's a
really strong and stable stance but it's
causing his arms to go a little bit
wider than straight down so he's outside
of hip width just like he was for a
squat but the wider the like which is
not that much of a problem but the wider
The Stance The Wider the grip must be to
be on the outside of the legs which
means have a look at the arm angle I
want the arms to be completely vertical
and that's going to be the most
efficient position but his legs are in
the way so the first thing I'm going to
do is slightly bring in his stance so
it's exactly hip width so that his arms
can be a little bit closer so that they
more straight down the next thing if we
can replay on the video his execution
and his speed
I love smooth above everything so if in
doubt go smooth now a lot of people love
to be really explosive with the deadlift
and it's a great thought because we want
to train ourselves to be explosive but
not at the expense of good lifting
technique and something I like to
consider is if you to stand up out of a
chair would you jump in the air or would
you just stand that's how I want him to
look like with his deadlift if you have
a look at his lockout he's he's quite
sharp and and a little bit jolty with
that lockout um I I understand why
because it's you know increase the
intensity and we want to really push and
be explosive I want smooth okay so I
want you to do it again with those small
changes his feet are hip width apart
that's the perfect stance now his grip
was about 1 cm away from that line I
want you on that line okay Pinky or no
index finger so I want you to be able to
just look at that line up there perfect
good so now his arm angle is is closer
to completely
vertical yeah nice and look how smooth
that lockout
is no unnecessary jolting no I want five
reps
boo so three
more beautiful and
[Applause]
smooth so I don't want slow I'm not
asking him to go slow I just want him to
put as much force through that barbell
that he needs to to stand with a smooth
EX execution just like that good now
let's go to 60 kg as you can see all I
did was introduced two cues BR stance in
which brought his grip in and told him
to be smoother on the execution I didn't
need to change anything else uh and now
we're just going to do the exact same
thing again five reps again hip width
stance arms straight down which is
exactly on those
lines good sit into position armpits the
pelvis and push the world away
nice and smooth so when it's a little
bit heavier he needs to apply more Force
Through the
ground to accommodate for the increased
weight but we still want it to be smooth
that's
perfect oh
yeah last
one good
nice now I'm very confident with the way
that he's moving uh and the fact that
most people deadlifts are stronger than
their squats especially when they get
back into their training um that we are
going to be comfortable enough to go to
80 kg what is your best deadlift uh 180
so see the discrepancy his deadlift was
180 and his squat was 120 so his back
strength that's pretty typical he's a
lot stronger or his ability to pick up a
weight off the ground is a lot better
than his ability to squat heavy weight
which is very normal so we got 80 kg
again yeah so this is going to be your
work set now the idea of this well the
idea of your squats was to do two sets
of five but because it was quite hard we
called a stop to it yeah and one set of
five that's enough for you because the
intensity was too high I want to leave
at least three reps in reserve yeah
that's the intensity that I want to be
here I want to be super conservative
yeah uh so here that's what I'm looking
for If It's a Grind like how the squat
was then I'll say great not bad but we
don't need to do more sets yeah so the
objective now is two sets of five uh
let's see how you go same cues every
time
barbell is over his midfoot that's
perfect placement armpits the pelvis to
recruit his
lats I'd bring your eyes up a little bit
so look at my foot with your whole face
and keep your eyes there the whole time
from start to finish
beautiful the body follows the eyes and
when the head's looking down too much it
causes your torso to tip forward too
much real
good push the world
away good
I felt good it was good yeah so as you
can see there's plenty of reps in a
reserve um good so sometimes like I
could probably go to 100 kg and I bet
you he'd lift it uh pretty comfortably
but just because you can doesn't mean
you should so I think 80 kilg is
fantastic uh next week you do 90 and the
week after you do 100 uh no harm done
one of the most common things that
people do is they want to get their
games back real quick they want them
today so they want to come in and go as
hard as they can um I'll tell you right
now we're going to do the minimalist
approach and I promise you you won't be
weaker after today okay does that make
sense you know what I mean so it's like
you're not missing out by going
conservative getting a feel for what's
required of the next session and
allowing room to be able to progress
every single time you come into the gym
yeah okay I've never had my feet that
close yeah it's an interesting thing
because it's a a pretty logical thing to
think wide is a more stable base of
support um but that's how you need to
consider it it's like where does that
what does that mean for the rest of your
body it means your arms need to be wider
The Wider your arms the further you need
to travel that makes it harder
unnecessarily okay so arm straight down
is the most efficient I'm not saying you
can't stand wider if that's your hip
position and that's your hip structure
that's where you should be um but most
people's hip structures allow for hip
width stance go and have a look at how
basketballers will slam dunk or any of
the best athletes do a vertical uh leap
be like that they're not like this do
you know what I'm saying
yeah and they don't even bend their
knees down that far either yeah right so
so that's a I felt way more comfortable
way more that was so so much easier it's
smooth yeah uh and if you have a look at
how Thor beanson is now deadlifting he's
to have a really wide Bas of support as
well and it's taken me a long time to to
change his stance so it's more efficient
but Thor bonson stance is a lot narrower
now and it's looking
crisp um but I guess an activity for
everyone at home for the in argument of
the narrow stance deadlift let's have a
look at the best 1000b deadlifters in
the world that are lighter body weight
here's a few Alexi novakov Adam Bishop
these are who I consider to be the most
technical of the lightweight thousand PB
deadlifters and they've got beautiful
efficient stance I don't want to call it
narrow stance it's correct stance which
is hip width and now half bonson and now
mitcha actually I gave him that tip
Mitch you're welcome for something like
this it's roughly 3 minute rest in
between sets and this is his last set
and I'm expecting it to be as easy as
the first Set Let's
Go hip width stance bar in line with
midfoot arm straight down Sit into
position thinking about pushing instead
of pulling the body knows to
pull but it doesn't know to use legs to
drive into the into the
ground two more so it's locking the
Torso in place and just pushing the
world away really nice last
one
yeah lovely looking deadlift lovely
looking deadlift now here's the
interesting thing um I could make this
workout much more complete by adding in
two more exercises uh one of them is a
leg extension and the other one is a
hamstring curl the reason we do that is
those isolation exercises complement his
compound movements so for a squat it's
not a complete quadriceps developer
you're missing one muscle which is
erectus
femoris and that's the way that we
target it is with a leg extension to
complement the squat same with the
hamstrings on a deadlift one of those
muscles of these hamstrings isn't
working and that's the short head of the
biceps for morus uh because the only
action that we're doing with hamstrings
is hip joint extension now biceps for
morus will only act on knee joint
flexion so the best way to complement
this is a leg extension and a hand
answering Cur however the unique part
about Gareth is he's coming back from
knee surgery he had a complete knee
reconstruction and whenever I'm dealing
with Rehabilitation I'll introduce one
exercise at a time so I consider that
the squat the deadlift isn't really it's
kind of like opposing uh and it
complement the movement um but adding in
something like a leg extension on a
hamstring curl that act directly on that
knee joint could be something that
initiates pain in his knee and if I did
do the leg extension to hamstring curl
and he comes back tomorrow saying my
knee is really sore I'm going to not
know which exercise exactly caused that
knee pain whereas if tomorrow he comes
back saying my knee is sore I will know
exactly what it was and it would have
been the squat now if he doesn't say
it's sore which I'm anticipating is
what's going to happen because it was a
somewhat conservative session I'm going
to say excellent guess what we do next
week we're going to add a leg extension
and a hamstring curl to complement that
session so you have a complete leg
workout however we're not done yet we're
going to add carves cuz no one likes a
man with skinny calves let's check it
don't look at mine don't look at mine
one of my favorite calf exercises single
leg calf raise standing so you got bent
knee or straight knee straight knee is
better than bent knee bent knee takes
out the big gastrus muscle which is one
of the two you got gastrus and salus the
bent knee is better for for the cus but
the straight knee is good for the
gastrock and the cus so instead of doing
two exercises just do a straight knee
and that's going to be enough now here's
the next thing if you think that you're
going to get sore KN s quadriceps from
squats watch what this does to you all
right so this is one of the easiest
things to do too much work on the first
session and the pain that you get from
too much calf razors is a lot worse than
the pain you get from squats so this is
something you definitely need to leave
reps in reserve all we're going to do is
two sets of eight let's go so one leg at
a time holding on for balance so stand
stand up like you're doing two legs and
then just lift one leg off the ground
okay so lift one leg off good nice and
deep and nice and tall one nice and deep
nice and Tall two a little bit
faster three good four deeper five good
nice big stretch nice big
contraction seven one more and eight
good swap so more reps in reserve that's
how you want it don't take this movement
to fail especially on your first session
back after a few sessions I'm going to
make him do way more sets way more
weight and way more reps and take it to
fail and I don't want to say Beyond but
take it absolutely to fail and he'll be
able to handle it but for now first
session back leave reps in reserve good
chill how was that
awkward L Bambi okay fine one more set
and then that is your leg session
amazing that's gareth's introduction to
leg session session number one uh now if
you want to know how to write a program
for this I would say this is day one day
two will be upper body Push Pull and
then we can do four days a week uh which
is the way that I like to do it if
you're coming off a long time of no
training is get back to full schedule of
training frequency which is you know
four days a week and the way that we're
doing it is upper lower upper lower so
today is lower tomorrow is UPA on the
next low body session we can do the
exact same thing again but add a little
bit more and and then we do the same
thing again for the upper body so we do
a two-day split day one day two day one
day two and we can do that for 3 weeks
before we go on to a more advanced
program so I hope you enjoyed today's
session give me a follow all that stuff
and see you next time